1. Injury. 2015 Jan;46(1):150-5. doi: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.08.048. Epub 2014 Sep
 18.

Do trauma systems work? A comparison of major trauma outcomes between Aberdeen 
Royal Infirmary and Massachusetts General Hospital.

Morrissey BE(1), Delaney RA(2), Johnstone AJ(3), Petrovick L(4), Smith RM(2).

Author information:
(1)University of Aberdeen, School of Medicine and Dentistry, Foresterhill, 
Aberdeen, Scotland AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
brianmorrissey@nhs.net.
(2)Trauma Service, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, United States.
(3)Trauma Orthopaedic Unit, Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, 
Scotland AB25 2ZD, United Kingdom.
(4)Division of Trauma, Emergency Surgery, & Surgical Critical Care, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, 55 Fruit Street, Boston, MA 02114, United 
States.

Trauma is an important matter of public health and a major cause of mortality. 
Since the late 1980s trauma care provision in the United Kingdom is lacking when 
compared to the USA. This has been attributed to a lack of organisation of 
trauma care leading to the formation of trauma networks and Major Trauma Centres 
in England and Wales. The need for similar centres in Scotland is argued 
currently. We assessed the activity of two quite different trauma systems by 
obtaining access to comparative data from two hospitals, one in the USA and the 
other in Scotland. Aggregate data on 5604 patients at Aberdeen Royal Infirmary 
(ARI) from 1993 to 2002 was obtained from the Scottish Trauma Audit Group. A 
comparable data set of 16,178 patients from Massachusetts General Hospital 
(MGH). Direct comparison of patient demographics; injury type, mechanism and 
Injury Severity Score (ISS); mode of arrival; length of stay and mortality were 
made. Statistical analysis was carried out using Chi-squared and 
Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel. There were significant differences in the data sets. 
There was a higher proportion of penetrating injuries at MGH, (8.6% vs 2.6%) and 
more severely injured patients at MGH, patients with an ISS>16 accounted for 
nearly 22.1% of MGH patients compared to 14.0% at ARI. ISS 8-15 made up 54.6% of 
ARI trauma with 29.6% at MGH. Falls accounted for 50.1% at ARI and 37.9% at MGH. 
Despite the higher proportion of severe injuries at MGH and crude mortality 
rates showing no difference (4.9% ARI vs 5.2% MGH), pooled odds ratio of 
mortality was 1.4 (95% confidence interval 1.2-1.6) showing worse mortality 
outcomes at ARI compared to MGH. In conclusion, there were some differences in 
case mix between both data sets making direct comparison of the outcomes 
difficult, but the effect of consolidating major trauma on the proportion and 
number of severely injured patients treated in the American Level 1 centre was 
clear with a significant improvement in mortality in all injury severity groups.

Copyright Â© 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.injury.2014.08.048
PMID: 25270693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
