1. Epilepsy Behav. 2017 Mar;68:45-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.12.018. Epub 2017
 Jan 19.

Low glycemic index treatment for seizure control in Angelman syndrome: A case 
series from the Center for Dietary Therapy of Epilepsy at the Massachusetts 
General Hospital.

Grocott OR(1), Herrington KS(1), Pfeifer HH(1), Thiele EA(1), Thibert RL(2).

Author information:
(1)Angelman Syndrome Clinic and Center for Dietary Therapy of Epilepsy, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States.
(2)Angelman Syndrome Clinic and Center for Dietary Therapy of Epilepsy, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States. Electronic address: 
rthibert@mgh.harvard.edu.

The low glycemic index treatment, a dietary therapy that focuses on glycemic 
index and reduced carbohydrate intake, has been successful in reducing seizure 
frequency in the general epilepsy population. Epilepsy is a common feature of 
Angelman syndrome and seizures are often refractory to multiple medications, 
especially in those with maternal deletions. Dietary therapy has become a more 
frequently used option for treating epilepsy, often in combination with other 
antiepileptic drugs, due to its efficacy and favorable side effect profile. This 
study aimed to assess the effectiveness of the low glycemic index treatment for 
seizure control in Angelman syndrome. Through a retrospective medical record 
review of 23 subjects who utilized the low glycemic index treatment at the 
Clinic and Center for Dietary Therapy of Epilepsy at the Massachusetts General 
Hospital, we found that the high level of seizure control and favorable side 
effect profile make the low glycemic index treatment a viable treatment for 
seizures in Angelman syndrome. The majority of subjects in our cohort 
experienced some level of seizure reduction after initiating the diet, 5 (22%) 
maintained complete seizure freedom, 10 (43%) maintained seizure freedom except 
in the setting of illness or non-convulsive status epilepticus, 7 (30%) had a 
decrease in seizure frequency, and only 1 (4%) did not have enough information 
to determine seizure control post-initiation. The low glycemic index treatment 
monotherapy was successful for some subjects in our cohort but most subjects 
used an antiepileptic drug concurrently. Some subjects were able to maintain the 
same level of seizure control on a liberalized version of the low glycemic index 
treatment which included a larger amount of low glycemic carbohydrates. No 
correlation between the level of carbohydrate restriction and level of seizure 
control was found. Few subjects experienced side effects and those that did 
found them to be mild and easily treated. The efficacy of the low glycemic index 
treatment and its favorable side effect profile make it an excellent alternative 
or supplement to antiepileptic drug therapy for the treatment of seizures in 
Angelman syndrome.

Copyright Â© 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2016.12.018
PMID: 28109989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
